What is new Orleans (#32228)
dotnet/docs: docs/orleans/whats-new-in-orleans.md

---
title: What's new in Orleans
description: Learn about the various new features introduced in Orleans 7.0.
ms.date: 10/31/2022
---

# What's new in Orleans 7.0

> Existing applications which use reminders, streams, and/or grain persistence cannot be easily migrated due to changes in how Orleans identifies grains and streams. We plan to incrementally offer a migration path for these applications.

Reviewer: u
```suggestion
Existing applications using reminders, streams, and/or grain persistence cannot be easily migrated due to changes in how Orleans identifies grains and streams. We plan to incrementally offer a migration path for these applications.
```

We have avoided such breaking changes for many years, even across major releases, so why now? There are two major reasons: identities and serialization. Regarding identities, Grain and stream identities are now comprised of strings, allowing grains to encode generic type information properly and allowing streams to map more easily to the application domain. Grain types were previously identified using a complex data structure which could not represent generic grains, leading to corner cases. Streams were identified by a `string` namespace and a <xref:System.Guid> key, which was difficult for developers to map to their application domain, however efficient. Serialization is now version-tolerant, meaning that you can modify your types in certain compatible ways, following a set of rules, and be confident that you can upgrade your application without serialization errors. This was especially problematic when application types were persisted in streams or grain storage. The following sections detail the major changes and discuss them in more detail.

## Packaging changes

> If you are upgrading a project to Orleans 7.0, you will need to preform the following actions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are upgrading a project to Orleans 7.0, you will need to perform the following actions:
```

![orleans_analyzer](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/203839/154169861-7c5547d0-e489-4af9-8aba-1e2f71c50211.gif)

By default, Orleans will serialize your type by encoding its full name. You can override this by adding an `[Alias("MyType")]` attribute. Doing so will result in your type being serialized using a name which is resistant to renaming the underlying class or moving it between assemblies. Note that type aliases are globally scoped and you cannot have two aliases with the same value in an application. For generic types, the alias value must include the number of generic parameters preceded by a backtick, for example `MyType<T, U>` could have the alias ``[Alias("mytype`2")]``.

### Serializing `record` types

> Members defined in a record's primary constructor have implicit ids by default, in other words Orleans supports serializing `record` types. This means that you cannot change the parameter order for an already deployed type, since that will break compatibility with previous versions of your application (in the case of a rolling upgrade) and with serialized instances of that type in storage and streams. Members defined in the body of a record type do not share identities with the primary constructor parameters. This means that you can and should start your members

Reviewer: > This means that you can and should start your members

Sentence fragment?

- ✅ **Do** start all member ids at zero for each type. Ids in a subclass and its base class can safely overlap. Note that both properties in the following example have ids equal to `0`.

```csharp
[GenerateSerializer]
public class MyBaseClass
{
    [Id(0)]
    public int MyBaseInt { get; set; }
}

[GenerateSerializer]
public class MySubClass : MyBaseClass
{
    [Id(0)]
    public int MyBaseInt { get; set; }
}
```

- ✅ **Do** widen numeric member types as needed. You can widen `sbyte` to `short` to `int` to `long`.
  * You can narrow numeric member types but it will result in a runtime exception if observed values cannot be represented correctly by the narrowed type. For example, `int.MaxValue` cannot be represented by a `short` field, so narrowing an `int` field to `short` can result in a runtime exception if such a value were encountered.
- ❌ **Do not** change the signedness of a numeric type member. You must not change a member's type from `uint` to `int` or an `int` to a `uint`, for example.

#### Surrogates for serializing foreign types

> Often times, you will want to pass types between grains which you do not have full control over. In these cases, it may be impractical to convert to and from some custom-defined type in your application code manually. Orleans offers a solution for these situations in the form of surrogate types. Surrogates are serialized in place of their target type and have functionality to convert to and from the target type. Here is an example of a foreign type and a corresponding surrogate and converter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes you may need to pass types between grains which you do not have full control over. In these cases, it may be impractical to convert to and from some custom-defined type in your application code manually. Orleans offers a solution for these situations in the form of surrogate types. Surrogates are serialized in place of their target type and have functionality to convert to and from the target type. Here is an example of a foreign type and a corresponding surrogate and converter:
```
